Hi. In this video we're going to take a look at the while.
Now the while loop is pretty straightforward.
It is something that basically repeats a code of block as long as some expression is true.
And so the way it might work (very simply) we might have i equal zero.
Well i is less than five maybe you will print i.
Now of course we need to remember to increment that counter.
Otherwise we'll have an infinite loop.
And so, when we run that (you know) it just prints out 0 1 2 3 4.
Now what happens is that it's also i equal to zero.
And then it tests the condition is i less than 5.
If yes, if the answer is true, then it will execute this piece of code, and then it goes back to the beginning
and it tests the condition again.
And it will keep doing that as long as that condition evaluates to True.
Once i reaches 5, then we come back to here and we test is five less than five.
And the answer is False, and therefore the while loop is now finished. It has exhausted what it needs
to do. Now,
and the one thing here though is that, you'll notice that you're not guaranteed that the code inside
the code block will run at all.
In fact, if we start with i equal to 5, it doesn't run at all.
Well sure, because five less than five is False.
So it never runs.
Now sometimes you do want your code inside the while loop to always run at least once, and you'll find
that that you have that possibility in other languages.
For example you have something called the  do while loop  and the  do while loop  kind of looks like this.
And this isn't Python, so this won't work, but you might have (you know) do.
And then maybe your code block in here, and then a while and then your expression that you want to evaluate;
and test for True comes at the end.
And so what happens is, that this code block executes at least once, and then the test for the loop is
done at the end.
And if it's True it goes back to the beginning, runs the code block again.
If it's False it exits out of the loop.
Now we don't have that in Python, but it's very easy to emulate that.
And we can do something like the following:
So we can say, let's say i equals five.
And then we can say while True:
So what we do is, we're essentially creating an infinite loop here (right) because True is always going
to evaluate to True.
So whatever comes inside here is going to run. The code block inside here is going to run and it's going
to run for ever, because this is always going to be True.
So that's called an infinite loop.
Obviously we don't want that, that's kind of bad.
So what we're going to do instead is, we're going to use the break statement, and we're going to put on
a termination clause inside the loop, and we'll write it this way:
So while True, so while True, it's always going to be True.
So it will run.
And so this will print 5.
Then it's going to test to see if i is greater than or equal to 5.
And if it is, it's going to break out of the loop.
So break is a statement that terminates that loop immediately.
It doesn't matter if we put something afterwards here, print (you know) something, this print something here
will never run.
So let's go ahead and test that out.
And as you can see it printed five because well it ran the code on like this loop here, that didn't print
5 because (well) we never reached it.
Here we reached the print statement.
Then we did the test, then we did the break.
And obviously as you could see this never ran.
Now where else might you use something like this?
Where is that useful?
Well maybe in an example like this: Suppose that we want to use the console to let users enter their
name (right), and we just want to make sure that their name is at least two characters long, that it contains
only printable characters, and that it only contains alphabetic letters, so we don't want numbers mixed
in there and things like that.
So here's one way that we might want to do it.
We might do this:
So min_length, I'll make that a variable, that's going to be the minimum length of the name.
And then we might do something like this.
Name equals input please enter your name, and then we're going to say while not().
And then what do we want in the not().
Well, we want the length of the name to be greater than or equal to the min_length, (ok)
and we want the name to be printable, so we can use this method that's in the string class.
Our code is printable and we want to also make sure that it's alphanumeric.
So name dot isalpha.
And if that is true.
So basically if the length of the name is not greater than or equal to the min_length or the name is
not printable or the name is not alpha.
Right because we're not of this entire thing here.
If that's the case then we're going to want to ask the user to re-enter their name.
So when that happens we're just going to basically take this code here.
And repeat it (ok).
So we want to repeat that code.
And then, this loop is essentially going to continue until we have a valid thing.
But you'll notice that I can't just I have to put this name input outside the loop because why: I
need to know what was entered the first time around.
And then, if it was incorrect, I can ask again, and I can go into the loop. So that we can say print "Hello
name". (ok)
And of course that comes after the loop.
And so if we run that, we then get asked to enter your name, So I type a.
It's like - no, that's not valid.
OK fine I'll type a number and something is wrong here.
String object has no isalpha.
Yes I have to kind of spell things correctly.
So let's try again.
a doesn't work, 12 doesn't work.
And if I type my name in that works fine.
Hello Fred.
So, the only thing here you'll notice is that, we repeated this code (right).
I typed the same code in twice.
It's really never a good idea to type code twice.
You always want to make sure that you only do once.
Whenever you can.
And in this case it's really quite easy to clean up.
And the way we would do that,
I'm just going to take this code here and we'll refactor it.
So I don't want to ask this at this point.
But of course if I do that I can't make that test.
So instead I'm going to do this infinite loop that we talked about, and then I'm going to ask for the
name.
So I'll put that up here, and then I'm going to say:  if the length of the name is greater than or equal
to the minlength and the name is printable and the name is alpha, then we're done (right).
We're done with that, so we can break out of the loop.
And as you can see, and we'll see when we run it.
But this code and this code does the same thing.
The only difference is that we didn't have to specify this  name equals input  twice in our code.
So let's go ahead and run it, and we'll will get the same things we have a doesn't work, 12 doesn't work.
And Fred works just fine.
So that's a standard pattern, it's used obviously in other cases than just something like that.
This is pretty simplistic, but it's a good example.
Now we also have something called the continue statement.
So, what the break statement does is that it basically breaks out of the loop, and it terminates the loop
immediately.
The continue statement is a little bit different.
Continue means: hey, the current iteration that we're in right now, just skip everything that comes after
this continue statement, and go back to the beginning of the loop, Rerun the test,
and if it's true continue running.
So it's a little bit different.
It doesn't terminate the loop, it just stops the iteration, the current iteration.
It basically bails out of it right away, and continues the loop.
So let's look at a simple example.
a equals zero.
And we'll loop until a reaches 10 and I'll increment a right away so we don't get an infinite loop.
And then we're going to say, if a mod two equals equals zero.
So if a is divisible by 2 continue.
So basically skipp whatever comes afterwards in the loop, and all we're going to do afterwards in the
loop is just print a out.
So if we do that, you'll notice that we just print everything that's not divisible by 2: 1 3 5 7 9.
So this continue did not allow us to continue onto the print statement, but it still allowed the loop
to continue.
That's why it's called continue.
So, there's also something kind of interesting with the while loop.
Is that the while loop can have an else clause.
Now we've seen the else clause of if.
If if then else.
Right.
So if something else if and then we had the else clause.
But that's actually also available with the while loop.
And the way it works is that the else clause of a while loop will execute if and only if the while loop
did not encounter a break statement.
So, in other words, if the loop ran to its termination normally, we would say that it ran normally, then it
will execute the else statement.
And that's actually quite useful.
Let's suppose that we have the following:
So we have l equals 1 2 3 and value equals 10.
And what we want to do -
and by the way there's much better ways of doing this.
I'm just trying to use this example to show you how the else statement works.
There's better ways of doing this particular example, we'll see when we get to lists and generators and
so on.
But for now, here's what we want to do.
We want to look at that list l, and if val is not in that list, we want to add it to the list.
So let's suppose that (you know) we didn't know about the else statement.
We don't know what it does.
Then typically the way that would go about it is to keep track of a flag.
Basically that's (you know) we'll loop through l and then we'll have this flag and if we find the value
we'll set the flag to True.
Otherwise it will remain False.
So we have to start with found equals False, so we set the flag and use an index to iterate through l.
Again there's much better ways of doing this.
So as long as the index is less than the length of l, then we're going to say: if l idx equals equals val
(Well) then:  found equals true.
OK.
Now at this point we don't even need to continue the loop.
We found the item in the list we can just break right away.
And otherwise we're just going to increment the index.
And so at once this code finishes running while this loop, (you know) when the loop finishes running
either  found will be False, which means it has exhausted the loop; or we found the value, in which case
found was set to True.
And we also terminated early on the loop.
So now at that point we would say:  if not found
if not found, l dot append val.
and then we'll print l - just to see what the final result is now.
L should be one two three with 10 appended since it wasn't in there. We run that.
Fair enough.
That's what we get.
Suppose I had put ten in there.
Well that works fine as well.
It didn't add it because of that.
So that's one way of doing it.
But (it's) there's a way to do this a little bit better, without having to keep track of that flag basically.
And that's by using the else statement. So let's rewrite this that way: so let's say l equals one two
three, val equals ten.
Now we're not going to use  found equals false, but we are going to need the index, so we'll set the index
equal to zero.
And then while idx is less than length of l, we're going to say:  if l idx (hm) equals equals value.
So we found the value, then what are we going to do.
Well, we're just going to break.
OK.
That's all we're going to do,
we're not going to do anything else.
We're just going to break; otherwise we're going to increment index by one.
Now what this means is that we can now write the else clause, and the else clause will only run if the
while loop ran without encountering a break statement.
In other words it terminated normally. If it terminated normally, what does that mean?
Well that means we didn't find the value.
So at this point we can say l dot append()
val.
And now we can just go ahead and print again.
And so when we run there we see that we get 1 2 3 comma 10   1 2 3 comma 10.
You know we started one two three 10 wasn't found.
We added in there.
Now suppose that 10 was in there, then you'll notice that while it didn't get added, there's another element.
Why?
While it's founded so it did a break. Because it encountered the break, this else clause that appends() did not
add it to the list (here), so that's how the else statement works.
It's kind of weird, you wouldn't expect Python or you wouldn't expect a loop in general to have an else
call, but the while loop certainly does, and so does the for loop, that we'll look at in the next video.
But the for is a little bit different, and we'll get to that.
All right.
I think I'll stop there and I'll break this up into two videos. In the next video -
what I want to look at is: how these breaks and continues that are used inside loops work
when you have a try statement inside the loop.
So we'll do that in the next video.
So thanks for watching, and I'll see you in a bit.